A whopping 4,64,910 road accidents were reported in India in 2017 leading to the death of 1,47,913 people, according to the Transport Research Wing of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. This translates to three people dying every ten minutes on Indian roads. Most of these accidents can be attributed to over speeding, use of mobile phones while driving, drunken driving, jumping traffic signals and avoiding safety gear as per the study published on the Open Government Data (OGD) platform.


Road accidents rates are very high nowadays, especially two wheelers. Timely medical aid can help in saving lives. This system aims to alert the nearby medical center about the accident to provide immediate medical aid. The attached accelerometer in the vehicle senses the tilt of the vehicle and the heartbeat sensor on the user's body senses the abnormality of the heartbeat to understand the seriousness of the accident. Thus the systems will make the decision and sends the information to the smartphone, connected to the accelerometer and heartbeat sensor, through Bluetooth. The Android application in the mobile phone will sent text message to the nearest medical center and friends. Application also shares the exact location of the accident that can save the time.


A lot of electric vehicles like tesla have integrated accident detection And prevention but , no such mechanism has been developed for accident alerts


ABSTRACT This paper explores utilization of ICT technologies to overcome emergencies and accidents inefficiencies in transportation infrastructures. Providing In-vehicle designing systems that are targeted at traffic and emergency response management. This study presents an accident detection and notification system that operates on the basis of collecting information through vehicular sensor networks, intelligently processing it, integrating knowledge t and, finally, issuing alert notification of accident and accident location spot to emergency responder via GSM network facilitating quick response. An important indicator of survival rates after an accident is the time between the accident and when emergency medical personnel are dispatched to the scene. In this project, we introduce a system to detect and a send an alarm message followed by a voice call to the emergency responders, we have offered recommendation on how to make the system better in the future. This project aims at intelligent detection of occurrence of an accident and reporting the location of accident to the previously coded numbers so that immediate help can be provided by ambulance or the relatives concerned. It seeks eliminating the delay between accident occurrence and first responder dispatch, relaying situational data to first responders. It is impossible to completely prevent or avoid accident but measured can be put in place to reduce impact of accident. Our proposed system makes an effort to provide the emergency facilities to the victims in the shortest time possible.

9. 1.2. PROBLEM STATEMENT A number of technological and sociological improvements have helped reduce traffic fatalities during the past decade, e.g., each 1% increase in seatbelt usage is estimated to save 136 lives[4]. The road accidents lead to loss of human life and/or incapacitation. It was noted, with deep concern that most of these deaths occur as a result of late response by emergency services especially for accident occurring in remote areas or at night where there is no witness or a means of alerting the responsible authorities such as police, emergency services responders and or relatives. Moreover, each minute that an injured crash victim does not receive emergency medical care can make a large difference in their survival rate, i.e. Analysis shows that reducing accident response time by one minute correlates to a 6% difference in the number of lives saved [5].This project seeks to reduce the time taken between accident time and notifying the emergency responders of the accident occurrence.

1.3 OBJECTIVE 1.3.1 General Objective Our main objective is to minimize the accidents’ response time when an accident occurs and the time emergency responders reach the accident scene in reducing human deaths due to road accidents. 1.3.2 Specific Objective 1. Provide a system that is fully automated to help vehicle occupants even when they are incapacitated and subconscious. 2. Exploiting the capabilities offered by vehicular communication technologies 3. Increase safety of road users and comfort of passengers.

12. CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW 2.1 Theoretical Framework New communication technologies integrated into modern vehicles offer an opportunity for better assistance to people injured in traffic accidents [12]. Recent studies show how communication capabilities should be supported by artificial intelligence systems capable of automating many of the decisions to be taken by emergency services, thereby adapting the rescue resources to the severity of the accident and reducing assistance time [13].To improve the overall rescue process, a fast and accurate estimation of the severity of the accident represent a key point to help emergency services better estimate the required resources. This paper proposes a novel intelligent system which is able to automatically detect road accidents, notify them through vehicular networks, and estimate their severity based on the concept of data and knowledge inference. Our system considers the most relevant variables that can characterize the severity of the accidents. Through partnership with other stakeholders, we seek to utilize vehicle telematics in developing evidence-based protocols for the emergency medical community to effectively use automotive telemetry data. These data will help to reduce death and injuries among vehicle crash victims by enabling responders to more quickly identify, diagnose, and treat injuries. Use of modern networking technology to provide a cost-effective solution was emphasized by [14], he argued technological advancements would help with better identification of the vehicle location at all times, data transfer facilitation, and application of automated monitoring. 2.2

15. CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY/DESIGN PROCESS 3.1 Brief literature review of the methods During our project research we discovered important literatures, journal and publications which have been studied in the past concerning accident detection and alerting systems utilizing GPS and GSM technology to find the vehicle accident. This concurs with our projects aim as microcontroller sends the alert message through the GSM to an authorized mobile no. An alternate condition can be allowed by pressing a switch by the driver. Thus, resetting the device by interrupting the flow of sending the message in case of no casualty. 3.2 Research Design / experimentation Figure 1 3.3 Field work 3.3.1 Methods/Tools for data collection We agreed to use the following data collection methods: questionnaire, case studies, opinion surveys, simulation, physical evidence and professional review and knowledge tests. The decision on the data collection methods was informed by the desire to maintain

3.4 DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS Our system consists of two parts, alarming part and messaging part. The hardware includes, smart vibration sensor, Adriano Uno R3 microcontroller, GSM and supporting devices.


19. 3GSM800l Figure 4 3.4.3.1 GSM operation  When an accident has occurred, GSM sends a message to previously coded mobile numbers saved in the EEPROM. It supports data, SMS and call functionality transfers.  Baud rates ranging from 960-11520. . It operates at various frequencies they are: 850 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz and 1900 MH  GSM is connected to microcontroller.  Operational temperature: -30 0c to +800c 3.1.4 GPS (GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM) The Global Positioning System (GPS) provides reliable positioning, navigation, and timing services to worldwide users on a continuous basis in all weather, day and night, anywhere on or near the earth which has an unobstructed view of at least four or more GPS satellites. We used global positioning system, (GPS). This is a navigational system that uses a network of 24-32 satellites. The satellites are positioned in orbits about an altitude of 12,000 miles from the earth surface. The satellites send microwave signals which are collected by GPS receivers. GPS helps determine the exact position of any object on earth. Hence,making GPS has become a widely-used in both the military and the civilian industry application .

22. Figure 6 Features of the Arduino Uno R3:  Microcontroller: atmega328  Operating voltage: 5v  Input voltage (recommended): 7-12v  Input voltage (limits): 6-20v  Digital i/o pins: 14 (of which 6 provide pwm outp  Analog input pins: 6  Dc current per i/o pin: 40 ma  Dc current for 3.3v pin: 50 ma  Flash memory: 32 kb of which 0.5 kb used by bootloader  Sram: 2 kb (atmega328)  Eeprom: 1 kb (atmega328)  Clock speed: 16 MHz 3.4.5 LIQUID CRYSTAL DISPLAY The LCD is used in this project for demonstration purposes. However, it can be attached adjacent to dash board from where the proper working condition of the system can be observed. LCD is made up of an active matrix display grid or a passive display grid. Liquid crystal display is composed of several layers which include two polarized panel filters and electrodes. LCD is combination of two states of matter, the solid and the liquid. The liquid has a unique advantage of having low power consumption than the led or cathode ray tube. We are using 16x2 LCD display (2 lines, 16 characters). It has 14 pins .

23. contrast adjustment and two connections for led back light. The reason for selection 16x2 LCD display is proper display of information and its status. Liquid crystal display screen works on the principle of blocking light rather than emitting light. LCD’s requires backlight as they do not emit light by them. We always use devices which are made up of LCD’s displays which are replacing the use of cathode ray tube. Cathode ray tube draws more power compared to LCD’s and are also heavier and bigger. The ability to display and ease of programming numbers, characters and graphics makes it widely used. Figure 7 Figure 3.1.9 LCD interfacing with microcontroller

3.5 SOFTWARE AND PROGRAM 3.5.1 ARDUINO SDK COMPILER The Arduino SDK compiler for the microcontroller is used to solve the complex problems facing embedded software developers. The microcontroller applications that are written in C language and once complied using have the efficiency and speed of the assembly language. The on-chip peripherals of the microcontroller are accurately simulated by the Arduino SDK compiler debugger. The hardware configurations can be easily understood by the simulation reducing time wasting in setting up of Arduino. It also writes and tests the applications before implementation of the hardware 3.5.2 PROTEUS It is a Windows application software suite containing schematic, simulation as well as PCB designing. It possesses ISIS software used to draw schematics and simulate the circuits in real time. It allowed us provided real time simulation .through specialized configuration we produced microcontroller simulation for this project as seen in fig (9).

28. Figure 12 3.6.2 HARDWARE CONNECTION The system is powered by 12V.GSM module’s TX and RX pins of are directly connected to digital pin (2,3) respectively of Arduino Uno R3.GPS TX and RX pins are connected to digital pin (10.11) of the Arduino Uno. The GPS and GSM module is also powered by 4.2v supply. An display LCD serial clock (SCL) and serial data(SDA) pins are connected to ardunio’s digital pin(4,5) respectively. The sensor positive pin is connected to the Analog pin(2) of Arduino Uno while its ground pin is directly connected with Ardunio’s ground . the limiting switch is used as power reset and connected to the 12v feed of the Arduino when pressed the driver can restrict sending the message if the accident occurs but it does not warranty emergency response. The GPS receiver uses serial communication so we will first need to create a set of serial pins, we can’t use the Arduino’s serial pins 0 and 1 because these are used to program the board; we actually can use them but you would have to disconnect your GPS receiver from the board every time you want to upload a new program. The serial pins will be created in pin 10 and 11 for RX and TX respectively. We also need an object of the tiny GPS library. 3.6.3 LOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF OUR SENSING UNIT We will be placing it at the chassis of the vehicle so that the magnitude of collision can be detected properly. Other possible locations and arrangement of such sensing unit in our project is as shown in the figure (12).this will enable the vibrational sensor to be situational awareness. 13

30. 3.7 OVERALL SYSTEM WORKING EXPLANATION: The programming and interfacing of microcontroller has been mastered during the implementation. This work integrates GSM and GPS modems and crash sensors with Arduino based microcontroller. An optional 16x2 LCD is also used for displaying status messages and process progression. A vibration sensor (impact detectors) will be positioned at a strategic location. In case of occurrence of an accident, the vibration sensor (impact detector) will detect the collision and send the signal to the microcontroller. This will be indicated by glowing of the led attached to our system. The microcontroller acknowledges the signal and starts the execution of the program. The minimum accident detection vibration range is any value generated above 3v. When the voltage generated by the sensor is more than reference voltage it triggers the Arduino via the analog pin(2). The Arduino microcontroller reads location coordinates by extracting $gpgga string from GPS module data The GSM modem will send an accident notification message to the predefined numbers in the system along with the information about location of the accident. One of the predefined numbers may be medical emergency number. For purposes of demonstration we used our own phone numbers as we don’t have access to the emergency numbers. The SMS sent contains Minimum Set of Data (MSD) information which will include: The vehicle registration numberplate and geographical location. The medical help can easily be provided quickly to the victims and hence there will be a decrease in number of deaths as timely medical assistance can be provided. Depending on the user requirements we could add phone number of close relatives, who will get notified about the accident and reach the victims.

31. If the accident isn't bad enough, then the driver can press a reset button and stop further activities of the circuit. Additionally, the value of location obtained from GPS, when we move system on adjacent locations should be different. Unnecessary shock or vibration produced by machines, tilt of the car with respect to the earth’s axis can be identified and recognised but the machine and cannot trigger the controller to respond. GPS will take approximate same value with in distance of 40 meters 15

1.Vibration sensors may measure forces closer to those experienced by victims. In the event of an accident, the sensor is located at strategy location in a vehicle. The vibration sensor will experience close to the same forces and accelerations experienced by the occupants of the vehicle. The chassis of the car, so their motion directly mirrors the vehicle and will experience most forces the vehicle experiences 2. Moreover, since the system is in a stationary relative to the vehicle during the collision, it is possible to use the data gathered to recreate and model the forces it experienced during the accident by investigators such as police and insurance: when this directionality and movement is combined with speed and location information from the GPS receiver, it is possible to help reconstruct the accident, including any secondary impacts. 3. The ubiquitousness of the whole equipment, relatively low cost may and voice capabilities using the existing voice and data infrastructure will help improve in usage and wide adoption accident detection and notification system.

CHAPTER FIVE: CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS This project provides an effective, efficient, cost friendly, optimized design gadget that has many benefits. This system uses the microcontroller interfaced with GPS and GSM and sensors such as vibration sensor, with aim of reducing the response time and giving the location of accident accurately. Utilizing current technology to promote safer driving, reduce accidents and increase road safety. The system has proved to be effective and designed to suit the social, political, and economic circumstances found in developing countries. It can also overcome the issue of lack of automated system for the detection of accident and locating accident spot. As a result, the time for detecting the site is reduced and the person can be treated as soon as possible which will save many lives.

4.1 PROJECT LIMITATION Despite the significant advantages, we also there potential disadvantages that motivate future research and refinement, as discussed below. 1. Accident detection systems consume a significant amount of battery power. GPS receivers consume a large amount of power and sampling them at the rate necessary to determine speed accurately reduces the battery life of the device to several hours. To overcome this limitation, future work will explore filtering approaches that better distinguish between the false positive in the vehicle movement. 2. Destruction of the equipment during severe accident may prevent accident notification delivery. To maximize the probability that an accident is reported, it is critical to prioritize data transmission. We have initiated use of a two-stage process to report accidents. First, the initial accident report is sent using a small message that can be delivered. Any additional information is communicated in the following phone call following the transmission of critical data. Hence, increase the probability that the accident and crash diagnostic data is reported successfully.

39. 1. wireless webcam can be added in this for capturing the images which will help in providing more information to the emergency responders. 2. The accident alert system can be interfaced with the air bag system, which provides security to the driver in case of an accident. 3. This system can also be bettered by locking all the brakes. With this improvement, we can stop the vehicle and can weaken the impact of the accident. 4. A proximity sensor can be added to the circuit, which would alert the driver by beeping a buzzer if the driver is about to collide with the vehicle in front. 5. The presence of GSM modem makes it possible to track the vehicle in case of theft. The GPS modem makes it possible to make route navigation possible. 6. A warning light or a loud horn can be interfaced with the circuit which is turned on in case of an accident, which draws the attention of the people nearby to the site of the accident.